---
tags:
  - moby-dick
  - full-text
  - shownotes
  - Spermaceti
  - Tashtego
  - Queequeg
date created: Monday, April 27th 2026, 10:19:49 am
date modified: Monday, April 27th 2026, 10:15:32 am
---

| [[🎤040 Moby Full Text Ch72\|PREVIOUS]] |     |     | [[media/604180ff-3f37-49da-8b25-5c4140ca4c97.jpg\|NEXT]] |
| --------------------------------------- | --- | --- | -------------------------------------------------------- |


[Silk Reeling](https://youtube.com/shorts/yJWg07Mm9ts?si=WH_DeyvnFeQpfyf2) video
Where I learned how [wadding was used with a musket](https://youtu.be/xCrscZljkwc?si=KNhSDOGPOo6YjmLv)
[Tom Holland](https://youtu.be/AQmEJ-gFA3Y?si=vSSka3wBuBazWy5u) in the heart of the ewwwwwww
[Muezzin with kitty accompanyment](https://packaged-media.redd.it/wx10mft7jrtf1/pb/m2-res_854p.mp4?m=DASHPlaylist.mpd&var=sgpssan&v=1&e=1777334400&s=a6301b7624f7d33feba9aee2c6869298637dd773)
## Contents

[[#CHAPTER 76. The Battering-Ram.]]   
[[#CHAPTER 77. The Great Heidelburgh Tun.]]   
[[#CHAPTER 78. Cistern and Buckets.]]
[[#FOOTNOTES]]   

## CHAPTER 76. The Battering-Ram.

Ere quitting, for the nonce, the Sperm Whale’s head, I would have you, as a sensible physiologist, simply—particularly remark its front aspect, in all its compacted collectedness. I would have you investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself some unexaggerated, intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may be lodged there. Here is a vital point; for you must either satisfactorily settle this matter with yourself, or for ever remain an infidel as to one of the most appalling, but not the less true events, perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history.

You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm Whale, the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to the water; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes considerably backwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw; you observe that the mouth is entirely under the head, much in the same way, indeed, as though your own mouth were entirely under your chin. Moreover you observe that the whale has no external nose; and that what nose he has—his spout hole—is on the top of his head; you observe that his eyes and ears are at the sides of his head, nearly one third of his entire length from the front. Wherefore, you must now have perceived that the front of the Sperm Whale’s head is a dead, blind wall, without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever. Furthermore, you are now to consider that only in the extreme, lower, backward sloping part of the front of the head, is there the slightest vestige of bone; and not till you get near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the full cranial development. So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad. Finally, though, as will soon be revealed, its contents partly comprise the most delicate oil; yet, you are now to be apprised of the nature of the substance which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy. In some previous place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the body of the whale, as the rind wraps an orange. Just so with the head; but with this difference: about the head this envelope, though not so thick, is of a boneless toughness, inestimable by any man who has not handled it. The severest pointed harpoon, the sharpest lance darted by the strongest human arm, impotently rebounds from it. It is as though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved with horses’ hoofs. I do not think that any sensation lurks in it.

Bethink yourself also of another thing. When two large, loaded Indiamen[^1] chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks, what do the sailors do? They do not suspend between them, at the point of coming contact, any merely hard substance, like iron or wood. No, they hold there a large, round wad[^27] of tow[^2] and cork, enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide. That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars. By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at. But supplementary to this, it has hypothetically occurred to me, that as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder[^3] in them, capable, at will, of distension or contraction; and as the Sperm Whale, as far as I know, has no such provision in him; considering, too, the otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the surface, and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope; considering the unique interior of his head; it has hypothetically occurred to me, I say, that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected connexion with the outer air, so as to be susceptible to atmospheric distension and contraction. If this be so, fancy the irresistibleness of that might, to which the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes.

Now, mark. Unerringly impelling this dead, impregnable, uninjurable wall, and this most buoyant thing within; there swims behind it all a mass of tremendous life, only to be adequately estimated as piled wood is—by the cord;[^4] and all obedient to one volition, as the smallest insect. So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this expansive monster; when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable **braining** feats; I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity, and be ready to abide by this; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien,[^5] and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific, you would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow. For unless you own the whale, you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in Truth. But clear Truth is a thing for salamander giants[^6] only to encounter; how small the chances for the provincials then? What befell the weakling youth[^7] lifting the dread goddess’s veil at Sais?

## CHAPTER 77. The Great Heidelburgh Tun.[^8]

Now comes the Baling of the Case.[^9] But to comprehend it aright, you must know something of the curious internal structure of the thing operated upon.

Regarding the Sperm Whale’s head as a solid oblong, you may, on an inclined plane, sideways divide it into two [quoins](https://www.jmelledge.com/sitebuilder/images/WedgeSmall78-398x137.jpg),* [^10] whereof the lower is the bony structure, forming the cranium and jaws, and the upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones; its broad forward end forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale. At the middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin, and then you have two almost equal parts, which before were naturally divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance.

*Quoin is not a Euclidean[^11] term. It belongs to the pure nautical mathematics. I know not that it has been defined before. A quoin is a solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by the steep inclination of one side, instead of the mutual tapering of both sides.

The lower subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense honeycomb of oil, formed by the crossing and recrossing, into ten thousand infiltrated cells, of tough elastic white fibres throughout its whole extent. The upper part, known as the Case, may be regarded as the great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale. And as that famous great tierce is mystically carved in front, so the whale’s vast plaited forehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical adornment of his wondrous tun. Moreover, as that of Heidelburgh was always replenished with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish[^12] valleys, so the tun of the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily vintages; namely, the highly-prized spermaceti, in its absolutely pure, limpid, and odoriferous state. Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part of the creature. Though in life it remains perfectly fluid, yet, upon exposure to the air, after death, it soon begins to concrete; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots, as when the first thin delicate ice is just forming in water. A large whale’s case generally yields about five hundred gallons of sperm, though from unavoidable circumstances, considerable of it is spilled, leaks, and dribbles away, or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business of securing what you can.

I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun was coated within, but in superlative richness that coating could not possibly have compared with the silken pearl-coloured membrane, like the lining of a fine [pelisse](https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcS2enqLnEUai2TkCGlrpPN4Ged6muNPE4uPqA&s),[^13] forming the inner surface of the Sperm Whale’s case.

It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head; and since—as has been elsewhere set forth—the head embraces one third of the whole length of the creature, then setting that length down at eighty feet for a good sized whale, you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth of the tun, when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship’s side.

As in decapitating the whale, the operator’s instrument is brought close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the spermaceti magazine;[^14] he has, therefore, to be uncommonly heedful, lest a careless, untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly let out its invaluable contents. It is this decapitated end of the head, also, which is at last elevated out of the water, and retained in that position by the enormous cutting tackles, whose hempen combinations, on one side, make quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter.

Thus much being said, attend now, I pray you, to that marvellous and—in this particular instance—almost fatal operation whereby the Sperm Whale’s great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped.

## CHAPTER 78. Cistern and Buckets.

Nimble as a cat, Tashtego mounts aloft; and without altering his erect posture, runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm, to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun. He has carried with him a light tackle called a whip, consisting of only two parts, travelling through a single-sheaved[^15] block. Securing this block, so that it hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one end of the rope, till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on deck. Then, hand-over-hand, down the other part, the Indian drops through the air, till dexterously he lands on the summit of the head. There—still high elevated above the rest of the company, to whom he vivaciously cries—he seems some Turkish Muezzin[^16] calling the good people to prayers from the top of a tower. A short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him, he diligently searches for the proper place to begin breaking into the Tun. In this business he proceeds very heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some old house, sounding[^17] the walls to find where the gold is masoned in. By the time this cautious search is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, precisely like a well-bucket, has been attached to one end of the whip; while the other end, being stretched across the deck, is there held by two or three alert hands. These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the Indian, to whom another person has reached up a very long pole. Inserting this pole into the bucket, Tashtego downward guides the bucket into the Tun, till it entirely disappears; then giving the word to the seamen at the whip, up comes the bucket again, all bubbling like a dairy-maid’s pail of new milk. Carefully lowered from its height, the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand, and quickly emptied into a large tub. Then remounting aloft, it again goes through the same round until the deep cistern will yield no more. Towards the end, Tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder, and deeper and deeper into the Tun, until some twenty feet of the pole have gone down.

Now, the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way; several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all at once a queer accident happened. Whether it was that Tashtego, that wild Indian, was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head; or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy; or whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so, without stating his particular reasons; how it was exactly, there is no telling now; but, on a sudden, as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up—my God! poor Tashtego—like the twin reciprocating bucket[^18] in a veritable well, dropped head-foremost down into this great Tun of Heidelburgh, and with a horrible oily gurgling, went clean out of sight!

“Man overboard!” cried Daggoo, who amid the general consternation first came to his senses. “Swing the bucket this way!” and putting one foot into it, so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold on the whip itself, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head, almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom. Meantime, there was a terrible tumult. Looking over the side, they saw the before lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea, as if that moment seized with some momentous idea; whereas it was only the poor Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous depth to which he had sunk.

At this instant, while Daggoo, on the summit of the head, was clearing the whip—which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles—a sharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakable horror of all, one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out, and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung, till the drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg. The one remaining hook, upon which the entire strain now depended, seemed every instant to be on the point of giving way; an event still more likely from the violent motions of the head.

“Come down, come down!” yelled the seamen to Daggoo, but with one hand holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should drop, he would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared the foul line, rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well, meaning that the buried harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoisted out.

“In heaven’s name, man,” cried Stubb, “are you ramming home a cartridge[^19] there?—Avast! How will that help him; jamming that iron-bound bucket on top of his head? Avast, will ye!”

“Stand clear of the tackle!” cried a voice like the bursting of a rocket.

Almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous mass dropped into the sea, like Niagara’s Table-Rock[^20] into the whirlpool; the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it, to far down her glittering copper;[^21] and all caught their breath, as half swinging—now over the sailors’ heads, and now over the water—Daggoo, through a thick mist of spray, was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles, while poor, buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom of the sea! But hardly had the blinding vapor cleared away, when a naked figure with a boarding-sword in his hand, was for one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks. The next, a loud splash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue. One packed rush was made to the side, and every eye counted every ripple, as moment followed moment, and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen. Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside, and pushed a little off from the ship.

“Ha! ha!” cried Daggoo, all at once, from his now quiet, swinging perch overhead; and looking further off from the side, we saw an arm thrust upright from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as an arm thrust forth from the grass over a grave.

“Both! both!—it is both!”—cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout; and soon after, Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand, and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian. Drawn into the waiting boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; but Tashtego was long in coming to, and Queequeg did not look very brisk.

Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished? Why, diving after the slowly descending head, Queequeg with his keen sword had made side lunges near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there; then dropping his sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards, and so hauled out poor Tash by the head. He averred, that upon first thrusting in for him, a leg was presented; but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be, and might occasion great trouble;—he had thrust back the leg, and by a dexterous heave and toss, had wrought a somerset[^22] upon the Indian; so that with the next trial, he came forth in the good old way—head foremost. As for the great head itself, that was doing as well as could be expected.

And thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg, the deliverance,[^23] or rather, delivery of Tashtego, was successfully accomplished, in the teeth,[^24] too, of the most untoward and apparently hopeless impediments; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten. Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing, riding and rowing.

I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header’s will be sure to seem incredible to some landsmen, though they themselves may have either seen or heard of some one’s falling into a cistern ashore; an accident which not seldom happens, and with much less reason too than the Indian’s, considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of the Sperm Whale’s well.

But, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this? We thought the tissued, infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale, was the lightest and most corky part about him; and yet thou makest it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity[^25] than itself. We have thee there. Not at all, but I have ye; for at the time poor Tash fell in, the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents, leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well—a double welded, hammered substance, as I have before said, much heavier than the sea water, and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost. But the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it, so that it sank very slowly and deliberately indeed, affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing his agile obstetrics on the run, as you may say. Yes, it was a running delivery, so it was.

Now, had Tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very precious perishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant spermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret inner chamber and sanctum sanctorum[^26] of the whale. Only one sweeter end can readily be recalled—the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seeking honey in the crotch of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store of it, that leaning too far over, it sucked him in, so that he died embalmed. How many, think ye, have likewise fallen into Plato’s honey head, and sweetly perished there?

# Footnotes

[^1]: Indiamen: merchant ships used in trade with India
[^2]: Tow: fibers of hemp or flax, used in making rope
[^3]: Swimming bladder: an air-filled sac inside some fish that helps them maintain buoyancy and mitigate different water pressures at different depths
[^4]: Cord: a stack of wood measuring 4 x 4 x 8 feet, or 128 cubic feet
[^5]: [Isthmus of Darien:](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isthmus_of_Panama) the narrow strip of land through which the Panama Canal would eventually be built. (It was begun in 1880 and completed in 1914.)
[^6]: Salamander giants: some people (though probably not Melville) believed that salamanders lived in fire and therefore had supernatural powers
[^7]: What befel the weakling youth: In [a poem by Friedrich von Schiller](http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-veiled-statue-at-sais/) (1759-1805), a young seeker travels to Sais in Egypt. Told that Truth is hidden under a veiled statue, the man peeks and is horrified. He never reveals what he has seen, but warns others not to look
[^8]: [Heidelburgh Tun:](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heidelberg_Tun) a vast (30' diameter x20' high) wine vat in the cellar of the castle in Heidelberg, Germany. *ahem*     Melville is exaggerating the size of the whale's case.
[^9]: Case: head or skull
[^10]: [Quoin:](https://www.jmelledge.com/sitebuilder/images/WedgeSmall78-398x137.jpg) a wooden wedge with a handle, used to prop up the base of a cannon on a ship
[^11]: Euclidian: having to do with the geometric principles of [Euclid,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid) the father of geometry
[^12]: Rhenish: of the [Rhine River](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhine) in Germany and Switzerland
[^13]: [Pelisse](https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcS2enqLnEUai2TkCGlrpPN4Ged6muNPE4uPqA&s): tight-fitting, empire-waisted overcoat, often lined in silk, fur, or velvet.
[^14]: Magazine: storage compartment
[^15]: Single-sheaved: having room for one rope
[^16]: Muezzin: the person who calls Muslims to prayer five times a day
[^17]: Sounding: knocking on and listening to
[^18]: Reciprocating bucket: one of two buckets at either end of a rope run through a pulley. Here is a [diagram](http://www.powermobydick.com/images/ReciprocatingBuckets.png) from _Knight's American Mechanical Dictionary,_ published in 1877. And here's Ron Howard's version of what this looked like: [video](https://youtu.be/AQmEJ-gFA3Y?si=vSSka3wBuBazWy5u)  and [Interview with Tom Holland](https://www.the-independent.com/arts-entertainment/films/news/in-the-heart-of-the-sea-tom-holland-describes-nauseainducing-whale-scene-as-like-being-born-over-and-over-again-a6778966.html)
[^19]: Ramming home a cartridge: pushing a shell down into a mortar in preparation for firing
[^20]: Niagara's [Table-Rock:](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Table_Rock,_Niagara_Falls) a large shelf of rock that jutted out from the Canadian shore of Niagara Falls. A famous rockfall in July, 1850, took off one-third of the shelf
[^21]: Her glittering copper: a copper sheathing covering the ship's hull below the waterline, to protect it from marine growth
[^22]: Somerset: somersault
[^23]: Deliverance: rescue
[^24]: In the teeth: despite
[^25]: Specific gravity: the relative density of a solid or liquid, when compared with water. Substances with a specific gravity higher than water ought to sink
[^26]: Sanctum sanctorum: holy of holies, the innermost shrine of a Jewish temple
[^27]: Wad - here's how I learned about [wadding for a gun](https://youtu.be/oIpLojP8WRw?si=e_6WnPdIAML603tg&t=71))